
Ear: The hearing organ. There are three 
sections of the
ear, according to the anatomy textbooks. They are the outer ear (the 
part we see along the
sides of our head behind the temples), the middle ear, and the inner 
ear. But in terms of
function, the ear has four parts: those three and the brain. Hearing 
thus involves all parts of the ear as well as the auditory cortex 
of the brain. The external ear helps concentrate the vibrations of 
air on the ear drum and make it vibrate. These vibrations are 
transmitted by a chain of little bones in the middle ear to the inner 
ear. There they stimulate the fibers of the auditory nerve to 
transmit impulses to the brain.
The outer ear looks complicated but it is the simplest part of the 
ear. It consists of the pinna or auricle (the visible projecting 
portion of the ear), the external acoustic meatus (the outside 
opening to the ear canal), and the external ear canal that leads to 
the ear drum. In sum, there is the pinna, the meatus and the canal. 
That's all. And the external ear has only to concentrate air 
vibrations on the ear drum and make the drum vibrate.
The middle ear consists of the ear drum (the tympanum or tympanic 
membrane) and, beyond it, a cavity. This cavity is connected via a 
canal (the Eustachian tube) to the pharynx (the nasopharynx). The 
Eustachian tube permits the gas pressure in the middle ear cavity to 
adjust to external air pressure (so, as you're descending in a plane, 
it's the Eustachian tube that opens when your ears "open").) The 
middle ear cavity also contains a chain of 3 little bones (ossicles) 
that connect the ear drum to the internal ear. The ossicles are named 
(not the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria but) the malleus, incus, 
and stapes. In sum, the middle ear  communicates with the pharynx, 
equilibrates with external pressure and transmits the ear drum 
vibrations to the inner ear.
The internal ear is highly complex. The essential component of the 
inner ear for hearing is the membranous labyrinth where the fibers of 
the auditory nerve (the nerve connecting the ear to the brain) end. 
The membranous labyrinth is a system of communicating sacs and ducts 
(tubes) filled with fluid (the endolymph). The membranous labyrinth 
is lodged within a cavity called the bony labyrinth. At some points 
the membranous labyrinth is attached to the bony labyrinth and at 
other points the membranous labyrinth is suspended in a fluid (the 
perilymph) within the bony labyrinth. The bony labyrinth has three 
parts: a central cavity (the vestibule),  semicircular canals (which 
open into the vestibule) and the cochlea (a snail-shaped spiral tube). 
The membranous labyrinth also has a vestibule which consists of two 
sacs (called the utriculus and sacculus) connected by a narrow tube. 
The utriculus, the larger of the two sacs, is the principal organ of 
the vestibular system (which informs us about the position and 
movement of the head). The smaller of the two sacs, the sacculus 
(literally, the little sac) is connected with a membranous tube in 
the cochlea containing the organ of Corti. It is in the organ of 
Corti that are situated the hair cells, the special sensory receptors 
for hearing.